
You should ask yourself these questions to decide whether you’re willing to put yourself on the line or settle for less.
And that’s fine if you’re content to receive less, as long as you’re not regretful later.
Those Who Are Resilient Stay In The Game Longer
“On the mountains of truth you can never climb in vain: either you will reach a point higher up today, or you will be training your powers so that you will be able to climb higher tomorrow.” — Friedrich Nietzsche
Challenges and setbacks are not meant to defeat you, but promote you.
It’s a fact, if you don’t know what you want you’ll get what life hands you and it may not be in your best interest, affirms author Larry Weidel: “Winners know that if you don’t figure out what you want, you’ll get whatever life hands you.” The key is to develop a powerful vision of what you want and hold that image in your mind.
However, it’s important not to be discouraged by failure when pursuing a goal or a dream, since failure itself means different things to different people.
Same failure, yet different responses.
Are you willing to commit to this way of life or jump ship at the first sign of failure?
Similarly, there are no assurances even if you’re an overnight sensation, to sustain it for long, particularly if you don’t have the mental and emotional means to endure it.
Those who are resilient stay in the game longer and draw on their inner means to succeed.
If you leave it to outside conditions to dictate your circumstances, you are rolling the dice on your future.
So become intentional on what you want out of life.
Commit to it.
Nurture your dreams.
Focus on your development and if you want to give up, know what’s involved before you take the plunge.
Don’t leave your dreams to chance.
If you settle for less, you will receive less than you deserve and convince yourself you are justified to receive it.
Don’t leave it to other people or outside circumstances to motivate you because you will be let down every time.
Are you willing to play bigger even if it means repeated failures and setbacks?